---
lang: en
title: 20 Tsunami Warning 2.0
category: Respite
slug: /en/chapters/20-tsunami-warning-2.0
excerpt: There was a 2.5 weeks’ gap between me giving consent for radiotherapy and the commencement of treatment. Compared to the extensive research I carried out for my operation prior to surgery, I knew relatively little about radiotherapy.
nextSlug: /en/chapters/21-the-first-side-effect
nextTitle: 21 The First Side Effect
---

There was a 2.5 weeks’ gap between me giving consent for radiotherapy and the commencement of treatment.
 
Compared to the extensive research I carried out for my operation prior to surgery, I knew relatively little about radiotherapy. The shorter preparation period isn’t an excuse for this disparity. I think the main reason is that I underestimated its impact.
 
Why didn’t I take it more seriously?
 
Perhaps I took comfort in the news that it’s “only” an early-stage cancer, that the operation had been done, this “adjuvant” radiotherapy was just for insurance purposes (to reduce the risk of relapse), so the radiation dose shouldn’t be too high, and the side effects wouldn’t be too severe?
 
Perhaps I had the impression that the radiation would mainly affect my left face, jaw and oral cavity, sparing my right? Didn’t the oncologist say that they would try their best to avoid irradiating my major salivary gland on the right?
 
Perhaps the side effects as described in the patients’ information leaflets weren’t scary enough? Like how some patients would resort to a diet of ice-cream at later stages of treatment when eating becomes difficult. I’m an ice-cream lover, what’s not to like?
 
Or perhaps because the oncologist said there would be “more” side-effects “when compared to surgery”? Look, I had hardly any side effects from the operation. The term “more”, when perceived from that very low base-line, wasn’t too alarming. Wait, I think the oncologist also said that it’s not uncommon that morphine was needed for pain relief as treatment progressed...... “No, that won’t be me,” I thought. I needed no painkillers post-op!
 
Anyway, what needed to be done in those 2.5 weeks?
 
I had recovered pretty well from the operation, so no excessive recuperation or special diet was needed. Having said that, I did try to put on a kilo or two, in case feeding did become difficult. Also, as the pandemic continued to ease a bit, and in anticipation of radiation damage to the oral mucosa, I quickly made an appointment with a dentist for a check-up and some proper cleaning, as it could be months before I would comfortably have any dental work done again. It’s only then I realised the dental practice had changed hands and I got assigned to a new dentist. She was surprised to learn that not so long ago behind my soft palate lived a tennis ball-sized ninja tumour. My jaw muscles were elastic again and the soft palate had bounced back to its original position with the expected curvature. The back of my throat was symmetrical again! The ninja really did a doron and left without a trace, not even an imprint on the very flexible soft palate! 
 
With radiotherapy looming, the hospital also referred me to a dental surgeon. He explained that the wounds from tooth extractions in the future would not heal that easily due to radiation damage of the gum and would need to be carried out in the hospital. Therefore, patients are always advised to have extractions, some pre-emptive, done prior to therapy. He assessed that my teeth were all fine, except for the two wisdom teeth on the left which had erupted less than vertically, potentially causing problems in the future. He could remove them if I wished.
 
Even though they’re a bit tricky to take care of, for better or worse I have lived peacefully with all four wisdom teeth for over twenty years. Given my age, I doubted that they would grow much further, unlike how Mount Everest grows a little taller from time to time. Less than vertical? Just let them be! Another consideration was the timing: having just made a full recovery from the operation, I really wasn’t keen on putting myself through another week or two of misery and soft diet post-extraction; by the time the gum healed, new wounds would be inflicted by radiotherapy. I was happy to buy this period of respite with a lifetime of disciplined dental hygiene. So the wisdom teeth stayed for the pain-averse me.
 
The pre-therapy preparation also involved a bespoke mask-making session at the hospital with the radiographers, in addition to the routine COVID-19 test. Designed for head-and-neck cancer patients, the mask, made from a breathable plastic mesh, wrapped around my head, neck and shoulders, immobilising them during each therapy session as I laid on the treatment table. Accurate positioning partly depended on the snap buttons along the edge of the mask fastened to their counterparts on the table, as well as some markings on the mask aligned against some references in the therapy machine (which is basically a CT scanner). All these were designed to ensure my head’s posture (slightly back tilted) was the same at each session, to allow the radiation to penetrate at more or less the same angle. With such high-energy X-rays, what would normally be a tiny discrepancy of a millimetre or two could make a huge difference to the therapy and its collateral damage. Of course there were limits to such precision, since it’s impossible to stay absolutely motionless as a living being —— I needed to breathe! Also, the mask might not fit perfectly throughout the entire course of therapy anyway; the face might go gaunt due to weight loss, while some other irradiated parts might swell.
 
The surface area of the tennis ball-sized ninja was quite substantial. Any tissues in contact with the ninja, so called the “tumour bed”, were at risk of harbouring remnant cancer cells, needed to be irradiated. Not just on the surface of the tumour bed, but to a depth of a few millimetres. The total radiation dose was 60 Gy, divided into 30 equal sessions —— equal in dosage, targeted tissues and penetration angle. The sessions took place every weekday, spread across six consecutive weeks, starting in early September and done by mid October.
 
Tsunami. Yes, it’s for real this time. But I completely missed the alert......
